Poem
   This World is not Conclusion.   A Species stands beyond -    Invisible, as Music -   But positive, as Sound -   It beckons, and it baffles -    Philosophy, dont know -    And through a Riddle, at the last -    Sagacity, must go -   To guess it, puzzles scholars -   To gain it, Men have borne   Contempt of Generations   And Crucifixion, shown -   Faith slips - and laughs, and rallies -    Blushes, if any see -    Plucks at a twig of Evidence -    And asks a Vane, the way -    Much Gesture, from the Pulpit -   Strong Hallelujahs roll -    Narcotics cannot still the Tooth   That nibbles at the soul -   
   To fight aloud, is very brave -    But gallanter, I know   Who charge within the bosom   The Calvalry of Wo -    Who win, and nations do not see -    Who fall - and none observe -    Whose dying eyes, no Country   Regards with patriot love -    We trust, in plumed procession   For such, the Angels go -   Rank after Rank, with even feet -   And Uniforms of snow.   
   I’ll take a bath when it snows,   when I can look out the window up high   and see the sky all pale   and blank like a fish’s eye.   And I know the boats won’t go out tonight,   the fishermen drinking whiskey, locked   in a bar-dream, the music rocking them deeper.       It doesn’t snow enough here,   though some would say otherwise,   fearing accidents. But the paper boy, skidding   uphill on his bike in light snow, knows better,   making S-tracks when his wheels slide sideways.       We really needed this snow, the old men will say,   putting to bed the surface roots of trees,   putting to bed the too-travelled streets.       When everything is covered   the earth has a light of its own;   the snow falls down from the moon   as everyone knows, and brings that light   back to us. I needed this light.       All day I kept by the window, watching the sky,   a prisoner in my clothes, the wind felt dry   and mean. Starlings stalked the yard with evil eyes   —I hated them, and hated, too, my neighbor’s house   where sparks from the chimney fell back in a stinking   cloud—black ashes bringing no blessing.       When the roads are covered,   when the water is black and snow falls   into the waves, the birds’ hunger swirls   the air, dark lovely shapes. All hungers   are equal now. I'll give them bread and seeds.       I have no money; the whiskey is gone,   and I must bathe in water. Fishermen, please   do not go out in your flimsy boats tonight   to chase after the cod and mackerel,   to hook the giant eels. Go safe,   go free. Let your feet leave trails   through streets and yards, wandering   home, your crooked voyages to bed.   
   New houses relax on the fields.   Garage doors open soundlessly   to admit the monster. Tires stretched   over forty pounds of air   pressure float across gravel.       The boy closes the last storm   door on the last evening   paper and runs to the car   where his mother waits. She does not   answer him; the door slam freezes   her dreams. It is January.       A dog chained to a barn door   keeps barking. Somebody’s angry,   scared to let him go.   On the other side   of a forest past these fields,   wolves sniff the hard snow   of the tundra. I lay beside the only   tree for warmth, there   where the pack might find me.       The house takes care of us now.   Look at the meat   browning under the light.   The refrigerator switches on;   ice crashes into the tray.       Here are locks in case someone   wants to do us harm. Remember   how the police had to pound and pound   to wake us that night a white Cadillac   leapt from the icy road       into the arms of our maple! It hung there,   empty, doors flung wide—   it was a great white petal of a car,   breathing under the gas-lights, opening   and opening.   
   1.       Living from pill to pill, from bed to couch,   what doesn’t kill me only makes me dizzy.   Pain dissolves like chalk in water,   grit on the bottom of the glass.       Waiting takes forever,   throbs to the soles of my feet, Bella noche . . .       Hives as large as mice hump up under my skin   (“no more barbiturates for you, Cynthia!”)   —itch, stretch, I don’t fit my flesh—   sting, tingle, prick, the sorcerer’s threat.       There’s a knife stabbed through my left eye.   My right foot is made of elephant hide   and weighs in at roughly one cartload of potatoes.   Oxygen twenty-four hours; I’m swelled with steroids,       prednisone buzz in the brain; a motel room   with sixteen foreign workers sleeping in shifts,   playing reggae at three a.m.           2.       Oh I love my white pill   that makes the black fist of pain unclench,   unspasming the nerves. I float,   released to darkness visible,   worlds dissolving.       And the yellow pill, bitter on my tongue,   that wakes me at 2 a.m.   writing out plans in Arabic   to organize an expedition to the Pole.   Drug of hubris searing my eyes,   my scrawl unreadable in daylight: foil my enemies.       Bitter taste of fugue,   my hand shakes: some foreign being in my brain giving orders.   You must You must You will.       Later, the pungent brown liquor   shoots the dark with threads of gold behind my eyes.   One flash as the mind goes out.           3.       I must elude pain                                                               float past clarity   pain in the brain                                                               slammed down like a housefly.       It’s a big dodge.       Fly on a stovetop                                                               sizzle and ash pop.       This is illusion,                                                                           mental confusion                                                                   born in the synapse.   What can be undone                                                               down to the last gasp.   It’s a hodgepodge.       If you kill pain                                                   you will become pain;       pain does not feel pain,                                                               no nerves in the brain.       It’s a mind-fuck.       It’s just your bad luck.                                                                   A torpor sealed my brain                                                               I felt no humans near                                                               it seemed to me I could not feel                                                               or touch or see or hear.       I don’t know who I am                                                               without my medicine.   My skin will crawl with bugs                                                               if I don’t get my drugs.   My brain’s a maelstrom,                                                               singing a sad song.   Reality is so cruel.       Prednisone oh prednisone   so fast my mind racing, never tasting   rest.       Razzle-dazzle razz       Fist bitch piss stitch witch . . .                                                               (only wait, the fit will pass.)       fast, gash, lash, splash—QUIT!       (I saw a werewolf in a white suit, walking   past the tables at the Full Moon Café.   Floppy bow tie, big furry hands.)       Percodan, Percocet, let you go, let you rest.   When the grip lets you go and you float like a note   on the flow, there’s your life, there’s no worry—   (yeah, it’s funky how the night moves.)       Barbiturate babykins, narcotic slut,   black oil of opiate. Chatty Cathy, dirty brat,   bed-wetter, nasty pants.       Painkiller, painkiller, I have a new friend,   better than my old friend,   plugging holes in the brain:   Sigmund Freud, Sigmund Freud, Sigmund Freud, Cocaine!       I want a soft landing; let me float.   Once the seizure lifted me and threw me down.   I did not like it. I did not like lying there   on the floor looking up   through air like green water.           4.       And there is one so dark, a ghost,   it passes through the mesh of thought   without tearing a strand, whispering   destinies perceived true, pronouncing   sentences of death.           5.       A cloud, the absence of a noun, no name,   roaring far away in the summer   dark like a train, or a giant fan, or a highway that never stops.   The mind explodes in the dark of space,   unnursed by atmospheres,   as air raid sirens scream for blood   and I am only nerves, strung on constellations,   meridians and vectors quivering. A red and yellow   capsule invades the chemistry of thought; cathode rays blast   from the television screen and signals pass deep into space   until the stars are singing “Rosalita.” You   will not remember this night.   
                                                               “So, why don’t you sleep with girls?”                                                   “I’m not really attracted to girls.”                                                   “Are you telling me you were really                                                   attracted to every man you slept with?”                                                                            Conversation with a friend                 1.       After twenty I stopped counting,   not like my friend Beverly, who sewed   an embroidered satin star on her bell-bottoms   for every new guy she fucked.   She had them running down both legs   and around the billowing hem,   and was starting up the inseam   when the jeans gave out in the wash.       It was a boys’ game anyway, those years   of our extended homage to the penis:   the guitar playing the penis, drums saluting it,   cock rock, Molotov cocktail, the motorcycle   gripped between the thighs, and I went down,   we all went down, in the old cultural disaster   of idol worship—a thousand-year bender.   Only this time it was the adolescent member,   oiled and laved, thrust forward arcing,   thin with ache, all tight flesh poked upward,   claiming its own. How it came and went,   penetrating but never settling down,   and how often we were caused to admire it:   hairless sweet warrior, raider against the State.       But I have this sweet pink flower   here between my legs—I put my hand down and touch it,   still soft and wet, and many-folded, endlessly opening,   hiding, seeking, hidden and sought,   but never very much admired or even smiled on   in those years, never served much less sung to.   Not a garden then but a citadel,   a wall to be breached, a new land claimed,   but linger there? No, I would say   there was an overall lack of appreciation,       though breasts were well respected, slopping loose   under T-shirts like little animals,   and I would feel my nipples brush the cotton   with pleasure, see them regarded also with pleasure.   Still, sex then was a taking, like spoils of war, a victory   over all those straight fucks back home, marooned   in the dismal suburbs that birthed us squalling and red   and watched us flee in ungrateful cars down night highways.       And God knows it felt good those nights.   I was ready, it was ready, to open and answer the call.   And take me down and roll me over, yes, and give   it to me—but why all this riding away afterward?       Where was everyone going   and why didn’t I get to ride along? Who knew at first   nothing had changed, just wanting the thrust and tug   and slam up against the headboard, I should say so,   but left still wanting more, wanting to leap   out of centuries’ shame and be something new,   not this old consolation of women for the powerless,   some kind of cosmic door prize awarded   just for showing up with a dick,   some proof to themselves these boys were men.       “You’re good,” he said. Hell, I wasn’t taking a typing test,   I was fighting to live in a dying world.   I was throwing myself away, an offering to wildest space,   surrender to the mind’s dissolve, the body’s electric light,   nerve endings firing like exploding stars.   “You’re good,” they all said:   you’d think somebody was doing a survey.   Girls say yes to boys who say no, and then   your professor asks if you’re wearing underwear,   when you meet for your conference on the poetry of Yeats.       Crossing the border after midnight in a borrowed car   after a visit to the after-hours doctor’s office in Sarnia.   Nodding out in the back seat, pills wearing off.   He was a legend among undergraduates:   cheap and reliable, always on call,   until a month later the headlines screamed   “Abortion Doc!” when a girl died in his office   and he dragged her down to the river   and dumped her body in the underbrush.   
   Heart, oh heart,   I sit here writing your name   on pieces of paper,   folded, hidden, misplaced . . .   found again.       There is the element of saying   and there is the element of making:   one needn’t choose.   I am singing the dream out from the ice,   asking it to carry me   like a horse or a river, down and away.       This day, here in paned-glass sun:   the young waitress shaking out her apron   and retying it flat across her stomach—   a bit of vanity—her hair swept off her neck,   crash of a milk bottle   on the granite counter, cream   spread in a mild pool toward the rim,   and the roots of habit and longing   briefly seized by the mind.       So noisy here! The sound echoes   out of years, brought to this   showing forth, unrehearsed.   It seems we wake   and find ourselves repeating,   embodying the ancient gestures   by which we recognize   ourselves completed.       Not one of us could be born   and invent life—it must show through us—   the arm flung in the air, the coffee poured out,   and down the street, someone hurrying by,   head down against the wind.       And a man and a woman   come to an old grief,   carved in them, carved   into them   —the old way of water wearing rock—   by law, and the hatred   between them is equal   to the hope neither will release.       Each wants to be whole,   to embody all of time, when nothing   in this world is whole, and   this is by law.       When my father said bitterly   to my mother: you have changed,   he meant, without meaning to say,   how she had changed him. A man   holds his head down against the wind.   Yet the wind fills him   with the dust of temples,   the breath of the dead.       The dream of the light   inside the branches—   a gleam of wet, glimmer that is a bud,   the leaf within the bud.       The photographer comes inside   and closes the lens of his camera.   Then he is the lens. Then my eye   is the light. This   is the element of saying.   The young waitress flings a paper cup   behind her, into the trash can.   That is a saying. The cream swirled   into the coffee, the sugar   dissolving, disembodied,   and the body of the manager disappears,   swallowed into a doorway.       The element of making is slow,   uncertain as a temple,   a falling forward, stitching back,   like a stone wall, like the panes in an   arched window, like a repetition   chosen beyond necessity.       Yet somehow we have seen all this before—   the girl in the fur hat   speaking syrup into a phone;   the falseness of her charm   is an ancient imposter, familiar and   therefore true.   A door is opened and falls   closed. Suddenly at every table   someone looks down and is reading—   books, newspapers, calendars,   reading tea leaves, reading bones.       A woman in a periwinkle jacket: I am reading   her shoulders as the day introspects.   In dream the passive construction   and the past perfect tense prevail:she was being pushed on a swing.   The woman with many television credits   gazes out the window, heavy with years,   forgetting herself, forgetting sorrow,   the false husband, the crippled child,   the old plots forgetting,    and it is suddenly lovely, as free as   something read or dreamed; the young   waitress with sun on her   face—her unblemished face—looks up,   from the middle of eternity, her desire   immaculate in the moment.    When a word is beautiful   above all others—your name—   when a woman appears as a bird of prey   and we turn away,   hoping not to be recognized—oh heart!—       when the light on the branches   flares in a window with no sky,   this is old story reading us, these are springs   from words laid down before   and ahead of us, and in the moment   we are making an answer.   
   I like to see it lap the Miles -   And lick the Valleys up -    And stop to feed itself at Tanks -    And then - prodigious step   Around a Pile of Mountains -    And supercilious peer   In Shanties - by the sides of Roads -    And then a Quarry pare   To fit its sides   And crawl between   Complaining all the while   In horrid - hooting stanza -    Then chase itself down Hill -    And neigh like Boanerges -    Then - prompter than a Star   Stop - docile and omnipotent   At it's own stable door -
   Katherine, Katherine, Katherine, Katherine.   Black hair, small cold eyes, whom you loved.   Cock-tease Katherine, chewer of souls.   The door blew open and she blew in, a ghoul.   Black air, small cold wind, taking everything.   Fish-eater Katherine, whose nails dig blood.   I’m going to call her pinch-cunt, pickle-lip,   piss-dribble, shit-smear, goat’s-meat breath.   I want to throw stones at her mother’s corpse,   send her children to name-change foster homes.   May the coat she is wearing burst into flames   and boil the flesh blistering off her bones.   May she be refused in both heaven and hell   and wander the earth forever without rest—   a hungry ghost clinging to the rocks and trees.   
   At first you didn’t know me.   I was a shape moving rapidly, nervous    at the edge of your vision. A flat, high voice,   dark slash of hair across my cheekbone.    I made myself present, though never distinct.   Things I said that he repeated, a tone    you could hear, but never trace, in his voice.   Silence—followed by talk of other things.    When you would sit at your desk, I would creep   near you like a question. A thought would scurry    across the front of your mind. I’d be there,   ducking out of sight. You must have felt me    watching you, my small eyes fixed on your face,   the smile you wondered at, on the lips only.    The voice on the phone, quick and full of business.   All that you saw and heard and could not find    the center of, those days growing into years,   growing inside of you, out of reach, now with you    forever, in your house, in your garden, in corridors   of dream where I finally tell you my name.   
   It’s September: I’ve moved into town,   into the attic of an old barn—a big open room I reach   by climbing a ladder that rises through a hole in the floor.   The room is long and high, with windows at each end,   a row of skylights that leak rain, and shake   and chatter in the northeast winds. I sleep beneath   the roof’s steep pitch, my mattress flat on the boards,   looking up at the high ceiling, where morning   diffuses downward in grains of bright dust.    This was the old painter’s studio.   The light in those famous canvases is still here   —he couldn’t carry it away with him—   though his paintings took away everything else,   opening space with a stroke of blue or yellow.   I think of his violent loves, the stories   they still tell about him here.   But how quiet and alive his paintings were,   how they quiver with the life not yet realized.    The town is quiet in September.   Sometimes I hear people talking in the street.   Last night someone said they were going to wait for Michael,   and a voice said that Michael had gone home.   I walk the narrow path down to the marsh.   Wind hard in the dunes. Rain as I’m returning,   cutting through twisting streets, past gardens bent   low with rain, their colors a wash of gold.    I feel the air surround my body, feel it move   between my legs and between each finger,   as I walk, not mastering space, but in it.   And when the clouds open, the sky   suddenly wide and high, no roof of leaves,   it seems there’s nowhere to go but into wind or water.   I climb the narrow stairs that keep turning,   twisting inward until they meet the ceiling,   which opens and I rise through the floor,   released into an openness I never learn to expect.    At the yellow table I sit and read   an interview with Picasso’s lover, Francoise Gilot,   the only one to leave him and have another life.   She says she was not destroyed by him, as the others were:   “Because I am of the stuff that cannot be destroyed.”   I felt something blow through me then.   Some devouring wind. Surely, then,   I am of the stuff that can be destroyed.   Haven’t I felt it? The breaking of all I was?   Don’t I sit and count my losses,   here in this room where all the life I knew has ended,   so bare with desire I seem to be eating sky?    That’s how it is here: I’m lonely, sad;   the wind blows along the roof and I can’t sleep.   Rain runs down the walls and streams across the floor,   leaving dirty puddles on the boards.   A yellow table and a cupboard painted blue,   three chairs that don't match, or even balance rightly,   a dented bucket, its metal reflecting darkly   what is, what cannot be taken away.   What’s beautiful here? The whole thing   is beauty, a clarity not in things   but around them, complete. And still,    I seem to remain, somehow, myself,   to remain at least something, at a loss   to know how much can be taken from me   and leave me only changed, not ruined,   alert in an emptiness so alive   I recognized it as my life. What would be left,   the shape of it then, this life? I said some beauty,   or radiance, an endless space I fall into   or am taken up by, a brightness that holds me,   gathers light in the center of empty space,   like a vision of the life I have not lived.   
   For ten years I would not say the name.   I said: episode. Said: setback, incident,   exacerbation—anything but be specific   in the way this is specific, not a theory   or description, but a diagnosis.   I said: muscle, weakness, numbness, fatigue.   I said vertigo, neuritis, lesion, spasm.   Remission. Progression. Recurrence. Deficit.    But the name, the ugly sound of it, I refused.   There are two words. The last one means: scarring.   It means what grows hard, and cannot be repaired.   The first one means: repeating, or myriad,   consisting of many parts, increasing in number,   happening over and over, without end.   
   The Soul has Bandaged moments -   When too appalled to stir -   She feels some ghastly Fright come up   And stop to look at her -   Salute her, with long fingers -   Caress her freezing hair -   Sip, Goblin, from the very lips   The Lover - hovered - o'er -   Unworthy, that a thought so mean   Accost a Theme - so - fair -   The soul has moments of escape -   When bursting all the doors -   She dances like a Bomb, abroad,   And swings opon the Hours,   As do the Bee - delirious borne -   Long Dungeoned from his Rose -   Touch Liberty - then know no more -   But Noon, and Paradise   The Soul's retaken moments -   When, Felon led along,   With shackles on the plumed feet,   And staples, in the song,   The Horror welcomes her, again,   These, are not brayed of Tongue -   
   Banish Air from Air -   Divide Light if you dare -   They'll meet   While Cubes in a Drop   Or Pellets of Shape   Fit -   Films cannot annul   Odors return whole   Force Flame   And with a Blonde push   Over your impotence   Flits Steam.   
   A not admitting of the wound   Until it grew so wide   That all my Life had entered it   And there were troughs beside -   A closing of the simple lid that opened to the sun   Until the tender Carpenter   Perpetual nail it down -   
   In this short Life that only lasts an hour   How much - how little - is within our power   
   I never hear that one is dead   Without the chance of Life   Afresh annihilating me   That mightiest Belief,   Too mighty for the Daily mind   That tilling it’s abyss,   Had Madness, had it once or, Twice   The yawning Consciousness,   Beliefs are Bandaged, like the Tongue   When Terror were it told   In any Tone commensurate   Would strike us instant Dead -   I do not know the man so bold   He dare in lonely Place   That awful stranger - Consciousness   Deliberately face -   
   The Mushroom is the Elf of Plants -   At Evening, it is not   At Morning, in a Truffled Hut   It stop opon a Spot   As if it tarried always   And yet it’s whole Career   Is shorter than a Snake’s Delay -   And fleeter than a Tare -   ’Tis Vegetation’s Juggler -   The Germ of Alibi -   Doth like a Bubble antedate   And like a Bubble, hie -   I feel as if the Grass was pleased   To have it intermit -   This surreptitious Scion   Of Summer’s circumspect.   Had Nature any supple Face   Or could she one contemn -   Had Nature an Apostate -   That Mushroom - it is Him!   
   Glass was the Street - in Tinsel Peril   Tree and Traveller stood.   Filled was the Air with merry venture   Hearty with Boys the Road.   Shot the lithe Sleds like Shod vibrations   Emphacized and gone   It is the Past’s supreme italic   Makes the Present mean -   
   The morns are meeker than they were -  The nuts are getting brown - The berry’s cheek is plumper - The rose is out of town.    The maple wears a gayer scarf - The field a scarlet gown - Lest I sh'd be old-fashioned  I’ll put a trinket on.    
   A Bird, came down the Walk -  He did not know I saw - He bit an Angle Worm in halves  And ate the fellow, raw,    And then, he drank a Dew From a convenient Grass - And then hopped sidewise to the Wall  To let a Beetle pass -   He glanced with rapid eyes, That hurried all abroad - They looked like frightened Beads, I thought, He stirred his Velvet Head. -    Like one in danger, Cautious, I offered him a Crumb, And he unrolled his feathers,  And rowed him softer Home -   Than Oars divide the Ocean, Too silver for a seam, Or Butterflies, off Banks of Noon,  Leap, plashless as they swim.    
   I would not paint — a picture —   I'd rather be the One   It's bright impossibility   To dwell — delicious — on —   And wonder how the fingers feel   Whose rare — celestial — stir —   Evokes so sweet a torment —   Such sumptuous — Despair —   I would not talk, like Cornets —   I'd rather be the One   Raised softly to the Ceilings —   And out, and easy on —   Through Villages of Ether —   Myself endued Balloon   By but a lip of Metal —   The pier to my Pontoon —   Nor would I be a Poet —   It's finer — Own the Ear —   Enamored — impotent — content —   The License to revere,   A privilege so awful   What would the Dower be,   Had I the Art to stun myself   With Bolts — of Melody!   
   The Poets light but Lamps —   Themselves — go out —   The Wicks they stimulate   If vital Light   Inhere as do the Suns —   Each Age a Lens   Disseminating their   Circumference —   
   Crumbling is not an instant's Act   A fundamental pause   Dilapidation's processes   Are organized Decays —   'Tis first a Cobweb on the Soul   A Cuticle of Dust   A Borer in the Axis   An Elemental Rust —   Ruin is formal — Devil's work   Consecutive and slow —   Fail in an instant, no man did   Slipping — is Crashe's law —   
   Tell all the truth but tell it slant —   Success in Circuit lies   Too bright for our infirm Delight   The Truth's superb surprise   As Lightning to the Children eased   With explanation kind   The Truth must dazzle gradually   Or every man be blind —   
   Now I knew I lost her —   Not that she was gone —   But Remoteness travelled   On her Face and Tongue.   Alien, though adjoining   As a Foreign Race —   Traversed she though pausing   Latitudeless Place.   Elements Unaltered —   Universe the same   But Love's transmigration —   Somehow this had come —   Henceforth to remember   Nature took the Day   I had paid so much for —   His is Penury   Not who toils for Freedom   Or for Family   But the Restitution   Of Idolatry.   
   Fame is the one that does not stay —   It's occupant must die   Or out of sight of estimate   Ascend incessantly —   Or be that most insolvent thing   A Lightning in the Germ —   Electrical the embryo   But we demand the Flame   
    Let me make the songs for the people,    Songs for the old and young; Songs to stir like a battle-cry    Wherever they are sung.     Not for the clashing of sabres,    For carnage nor for strife; But songs to thrill the hearts of men    With more abundant life.     Let me make the songs for the weary,    Amid life’s fever and fret, Till hearts shall relax their tension,    And careworn brows forget.     Let me sing for little children,    Before their footsteps stray, Sweet anthems of love and duty,    To float o’er life’s highway.     I would sing for the poor and aged,    When shadows dim their sight; Of the bright and restful mansions,    Where there shall be no night.     Our world, so worn and weary,    Needs music, pure and strong, To hush the jangle and discords    Of sorrow, pain, and wrong.     Music to soothe all its sorrow,    Till war and crime shall cease;  And the hearts of men grown tender    Girdle the world with peace.    
   The Bustle in a House   The Morning after Death   Is solemnest of industries   Enacted opon Earth –   The Sweeping up the Heart   And putting Love away   We shall not want to use again   Until Eternity –   
   I heard a Fly buzz - when I died -   The Stillness in the Room   Was like the Stillness in the Air -   Between the Heaves of Storm -   The Eyes around - had wrung them dry -   And Breaths were gathering firm   For that last Onset - when the King   Be witnessed - in the Room -   I willed my Keepsakes - Signed away   What portion of me be   Assignable - and then it was   There interposed a Fly -   With Blue - uncertain - stumbling Buzz -   Between the light - and me -   And then the Windows failed - and then   I could not see to see -   
   I felt a Funeral, in my Brain,   And Mourners to and fro   Kept treading - treading - till it seemed   That Sense was breaking through -   And when they all were seated,   A Service, like a Drum -   Kept beating - beating - till I thought   My mind was going numb -   And then I heard them lift a Box   And creak across my Soul   With those same Boots of Lead, again,   Then Space - began to toll,   As all the Heavens were a Bell,   And Being, but an Ear,   And I, and Silence, some strange Race,   Wrecked, solitary, here -   And then a Plank in Reason, broke,   And I dropped down, and down -   And hit a World, at every plunge,   And Finished knowing - then -   
   Success is counted sweetest   By those who ne'er succeed.   To comprehend a nectar   Requires sorest need.   Not one of all the purple Host   Who took the Flag today   Can tell the definition   So clear of victory   As he defeated – dying –   On whose forbidden ear   The distant strains of triumph   Burst agonized and clear!   
   There's a certain Slant of light,   Winter Afternoons –   That oppresses, like the Heft   Of Cathedral Tunes –   Heavenly Hurt, it gives us –   We can find no scar,   But internal difference –   Where the Meanings, are –   None may teach it – Any –   'Tis the seal Despair –   An imperial affliction   Sent us of the Air –   When it comes, the Landscape listens –   Shadows – hold their breath –   When it goes, 'tis like the Distance   On the look of Death –   
   After great pain, a formal feeling comes –   The Nerves sit ceremonious, like Tombs –   The stiff Heart questions ‘was it He, that bore,’   And ‘Yesterday, or Centuries before’?   The Feet, mechanical, go round –   A Wooden way   Of Ground, or Air, or Ought –   Regardless grown,   A Quartz contentment, like a stone –   This is the Hour of Lead –   Remembered, if outlived,   As Freezing persons, recollect the Snow –   First – Chill – then Stupor – then the letting go –   
   Because I could not stop for Death –   He kindly stopped for me –   The Carriage held but just Ourselves –   And Immortality.   We slowly drove – He knew no haste   And I had put away   My labor and my leisure too,   For His Civility –   We passed the School, where Children strove   At Recess – in the Ring –   We passed the Fields of Gazing Grain –   We passed the Setting Sun –   Or rather – He passed Us –   The Dews drew quivering and Chill –   For only Gossamer, my Gown –   My Tippet – only Tulle –   We paused before a House that seemed   A Swelling of the Ground –   The Roof was scarcely visible –   The Cornice – in the Ground –   Since then – 'tis Centuries – and yet   Feels shorter than the Day   I first surmised the Horses' Heads   Were toward Eternity –   
   The sale began—young girls were there,         Defenseless in their wretchedness,   Whose stifled sobs of deep despair         Revealed their anguish and distress.   And mothers stood, with streaming eyes,      And saw their dearest children sold;   Unheeded rose their bitter cries,      While tyrants bartered them for gold.   And woman, with her love and truth—      For these in sable forms may dwell—   Gazed on the husband of her youth,      With anguish none may paint or tell.   And men, whose sole crime was their hue,      The impress of their Maker’s hand,   And frail and shrinking children too,      Were gathered in that mournful band.   Ye who have laid your loved to rest,      And wept above their lifeless clay,   Know not the anguish of that breast,      Whose loved are rudely torn away.   Ye may not know how desolate      Are bosoms rudely forced to part,   And how a dull and heavy weight      Will press the life-drops from the heart.   
   I never hear the word “Escape”   Without a quicker blood,   A sudden expectation –   A flying attitude!   I never hear of prisons broad   By soldiers battered down,   But I tug childish at my bars   Only to fail again!   
   The Props assist the House   Until the House is built   And then the Props withdraw   And adequate, erect,   The House support itself   And cease to recollect   The Augur and the Carpenter –   Just such a retrospect   Hath the perfected Life –   A Past of Plank and Nail   And slowness – then the scaffolds drop   Affirming it a Soul –   
   Let me not thirst with this Hock at my Lip, Nor beg, with domains in my pocket—   
   I counted till they danced so   Their slippers leaped the town –   And then I took a pencil   To note the rebels down –   And then they grew so jolly   I did resign the prig –   And ten of my once stately toes   Are marshalled for a jig!       
   A narrow Fellow in the Grass   Occasionally rides -   You may have met him? Did you not   His notice instant is -   The Grass divides as with a Comb,   A spotted Shaft is seen,   And then it closes at your Feet   And opens further on -   He likes a Boggy Acre -     A Floor too cool for Corn -   But when a Boy and Barefoot   I more than once at Noon   Have passed I thought a Whip Lash   Unbraiding in the Sun   When stooping to secure it   It wrinkled And was gone -   Several of Nature’s People   I know, and they know me   I feel for them a transport   Of Cordiality   But never met this Fellow   Attended or alone   Without a tighter Breathing   And Zero at the Bone.   
            Highlight Actions   Enable or disable annotations               I started Early – Took my Dog –   And visited the Sea –   The Mermaids in the BasementBasement i.e., the bottom of the ocean   Came out to look at me –   And FrigatesFrigates fast and highly maneuverable warships of the 18th and 19th centuries, used to escort other larger ships, or to patrol the coast and blockade harbors – in the Upper Floor   Extended Hempen HandsHempen Hands strong, thick ropes made of hemp, used on ships –   Presuming Me to be a Mouse –   Aground – oponopon upon the Sands –   But no Man moved Me – till the Tide   Went past my simple Shoe –   And past my Apron – and my Belt   And past my BoddiceBoddice bodice; an upper part of a woman’s dress, or a rigid, laced corset worn underneath clothing, covering the upper part of a woman’s body – too –   And made as He would eat me up –   As wholly as a Dew   Opon a Dandelion's Sleeve –   And then – I started – too –   And He – He followed – close behind –   I felt His Silver Heel   Opon my Ancle – Then My Shoes   Would overflow with Pearl –   Until We met the Solid Town –   No One He seemed to know –   And bowing – with a Mighty look –   At me – The Sea withdrew –       
   It sifts from Leaden Sieves -   It powders all the Wood.   It fills with Alabaster Wool   The Wrinkles of the Road -   It makes an even Face   Of Mountain, and of Plain -   Unbroken Forehead from the East   Unto the East again -   It reaches to the Fence -   It wraps it Rail by Rail   Till it is lost in Fleeces -   It deals Celestial Vail   To Stump, and Stack - and Stem -   A Summer’s empty Room -   Acres of Joints, where Harvests were,   Recordless, but for them -   It Ruffles Wrists of Posts   As Ankles of a Queen -   Then stills it’s Artisans - like Ghosts -   Denying they have been -   
   How many times these low feet staggered -   Only the soldered mouth can tell -   Try - can you stir the awful rivet -   Try - can you lift the hasps of steel!   Stroke the cool forehead - hot so often -   Lift - if you care - the listless hair -   Handle the adamantine fingers   Never a thimble - more - shall wear -   Buzz the dull flies - on the chamber window -   Brave - shines the sun through the freckled pane -   Fearless - the cobweb swings from the ceiling -   Indolent Housewife - in Daisies - lain!   
   Much Madness is divinest Sense -   To a discerning Eye -   Much Sense - the starkest Madness -   ’Tis the Majority   In this, as all, prevail -   Assent - and you are sane -   Demur - you’re straightway dangerous -   And handled with a Chain -   
   Heard you that shriek? It rose    So wildly on the air, It seem’d as if a burden’d heart    Was breaking in despair. Saw you those hands so sadly clasped—    The bowed and feeble head— The shuddering of that fragile form—    That look of grief and dread? Saw you the sad, imploring eye?    Its every glance was pain, As if a storm of agony    Were sweeping through the brain. She is a mother pale with fear,    Her boy clings to her side, And in her kyrtle vainly tries    His trembling form to hide. He is not hers, although she bore    For him a mother’s pains; He is not hers, although her blood    Is coursing through his veins! He is not hers, for cruel hands    May rudely tear apart The only wreath of household love    That binds her breaking heart. His love has been a joyous light    That o’er her pathway smiled, A fountain gushing ever new,    Amid life’s desert wild. His lightest word has been a tone    Of music round her heart, Their lives a streamlet blent in one—    Oh, Father! must they part?They tear him from her circling arms,   Her last and fond embrace.Oh! never more may her sad eyes   Gaze on his mournful face.No marvel, then, these bitter shrieks   Disturb the listening air:She is a mother, and her heart   Is breaking in despair.   
   Take sackcloth of the darkest dye,    And shroud the pulpits round! Servants of Him that cannot lie,    Sit mourning on the ground. Let holy horror blanch each cheek,    Pale every brow with fears; And rocks and stones, if ye could speak,    Ye well might melt to tears! Let sorrow breathe in every tone,    In every strain ye raise; Insult not God’s majestic throne    With th’ mockery of praise. A “reverend” man, whose light should be    The guide of age and youth, Brings to the shrine of Slavery    The sacrifice of truth! For the direst wrong by man imposed,    Since Sodom’s fearful cry, The word of life has been unclos’d,    To give your God the lie. Oh! When ye pray for heathen lands,    And plead for their dark shores, Remember Slavery’s cruel hands    Make heathens at your doors!   
   At the Portals of the Future,     Full of madness, guilt and gloom, Stood the hateful form of Slavery,     Crying, Give, Oh! give me room– Room to smite the earth with cursing,     Room to scatter, rend and slay, From the trembling mother’s bosom     Room to tear her child away; Room to trample on the manhood     Of the country far and wide; Room to spread o’er every Eden     Slavery’s scorching lava-tide. Pale and trembling stood the Future,     Quailing ‘neath his frown of hate, As he grasped with bloody clutches     The great keys of Doom and Fate. In his hand he held a banner     All festooned with blood and tears: ‘Twas a fearful ensign, woven     With the grief and wrong of years. On his brow he wore a helmet     Decked with strange and cruel art; Every jewel was a life-drop     Wrung from some poor broken heart. Though her cheek was pale and anxious,     Yet, with look and brow sublime, By the pale and trembling Future     Stood the Crisis of our time. And from many a throbbing bosom     Came the words in fear and gloom, Tell us, Oh! thou coming Crisis,     What shall be our country’s doom? Shall the wings of dark destruction     Brood and hover o’er our land, Till we trace the steps of ruin     By their blight, from strand to strand?   
   A Route of Evanescence,   With a revolving Wheel –   A Resonance of Emerald   A Rush of Cochineal –   And every Blossom on the Bush   Adjusts it’s tumbled Head –   The Mail from Tunis – probably,   An easy Morning’s Ride –   
   Before I got my eye put out –   I liked as well to see   As other creatures, that have eyes –   And know no other way –   But were it told to me, Today,   That I might have the Sky   For mine, I tell you that my Heart   Would split, for size of me –   The Meadows – mine –   The Mountains – mine –   All Forests – Stintless stars –   As much of noon, as I could take –   Between my finite eyes –   The Motions of the Dipping Birds –   The Morning’s Amber Road –   For mine – to look at when I liked,   The news would strike me dead –   So safer – guess – with just my soul   Opon the window pane   Where other creatures put their eyes –   Incautious – of the Sun –   
   Come slowly – Eden!   Lips unused to Thee –   Bashful – sip thy Jessamines –   As the fainting Bee –   Reaching late his flower,   Round her chamber hums –   Counts his nectars –   Enters – and is lost in Balms.       
   I know that He exists.   Somewhere – in silence –   He has hid his rare life   From our gross eyes.   ’Tis an instant’s play –   ’Tis a fond Ambush –   Just to make Bliss   Earn her own surprise!   But – should the play   Prove piercing earnest –   Should the glee – glaze –   In Death’s – stiff – stare –   Would not the fun   Look too expensive!   Would not the jest –   Have crawled too far!   
   Some keep the Sabbath going to Church –   I keep it, staying at Home –   With a Bobolink for a Chorister –   And an Orchard, for a Dome –   Some keep the Sabbath in Surplice –   I, just wear my Wings –   And instead of tolling the Bell, for Church,   Our little Sexton – sings.   God preaches, a noted Clergyman –   And the sermon is never long,   So instead of getting to Heaven, at last –   I’m going, all along.   
   They shut me up in Prose –   As when a little Girl   They put me in the Closet –   Because they liked me “still”   –   Still! Could themself have peeped –   And seen my Brain – go round –   They might as wise have lodged a Bird   For Treason – in the Pound –   Himself has but to will   And easy as a Star   Look down opon Captivity –   And laugh – No more have I –   
   I dwell in Possibility –   A fairer House than Prose –   More numerous of Windows –   Superior – for Doors –   Of Chambers as the Cedars –   Impregnable of eye –   And for an everlasting Roof   The Gambrels of the Sky –   Of Visitors – the fairest –   For Occupation – This –   The spreading wide my narrow Hands   To gather Paradise –   
   The Moon is distant from the Sea –   And yet, with Amber Hands –   She leads Him – docile as a Boy –   Along appointed Sands –   He never misses a Degree –   Obedient to Her eye –   He comes just so far – toward the Town –   Just so far – goes away –   Oh, Signor, Thine, the Amber Hand –   And mine – the distant Sea –   Obedient to the least command   Thine eye impose on me –   
   There is no Frigate like a Book   To take us Lands away   Nor any Coursers like a Page   Of prancing Poetry –   This Traverse may the poorest take   Without oppress of Toll –   How frugal is the Chariot   That bears the Human Soul –   
   All overgrown by cunning moss,   All interspersed with weed,   The little cage of “Currer Bell”   In quiet “Haworth” laid.   This Bird – observing others   When frosts too sharp became   Retire to other latitudes –   Quietly did the same –   But differed in returning –   Since Yorkshire hills are green –   Yet not in all the nests I meet –   Can Nightingale be seen –   
   You left me – Sire – two Legacies –   A Legacy of Love   A Heavenly Father would suffice   Had He the offer of –   You left me Boundaries of Pain –   Capacious as the Sea –   Between Eternity and Time –   Your Consciousness – and me –   
   Of Glory not a Beam is left   But her Eternal House –   The Asterisk is for the Dead,   The Living, for the Stars –   
   Publication – is the Auction   Of the Mind of Man –   Poverty – be justifying   For so foul a thing   Possibly – but We – would rather   From Our Garret go   White – unto the White Creator –   Than invest – Our Snow –   Thought belong to Him who gave it –   Then – to Him Who bear   It's Corporeal illustration – sell   The Royal Air –   In the Parcel – Be the Merchant   Of the Heavenly Grace –   But reduce no Human Spirit   To Disgrace of Price –   
   Like a fawn from the arrow, startled and wild, A woman swept by us, bearing a child; In her eye was the night of a settled despair, And her brow was o’ershaded with anguish and care. She was nearing the river—in reaching the brink, She heeded no danger, she paused not to think! For she is a mother—her child is a slave— And she’ll give him his freedom, or find him a grave! ’Twas a vision to haunt us, that innocent face— So pale in its aspect, so fair in its grace; As the tramp of the horse and the bay of the hound, With the fetters that gall, were trailing the ground! She was nerved by despair, and strengthen’d by woe, As she leap’d o’er the chasms that yawn’d from below; Death howl’d in the tempest, and rav’d in the blast, But she heard not the sound till the danger was past. Oh! how shall I speak of my proud country’s shame? Of the stains on her glory, how give them their name? How say that her banner in mockery waves— Her “star-spangled banner”—o’er millions of slaves? How say that the lawless may torture and chase A woman whose crime is the hue of her face? How the depths of forest may echo around With the shrieks of despair, and the bay of the hound? With her step on the ice, and her arm on her child, The danger was fearful, the pathway was wild; But, aided by Heaven, she gained a free shore, Where the friends of humanity open’d their door. So fragile and lovely, so fearfully pale, Like a lily that bends to the breath of the gale, Save the heave of her breast, and the sway of her hair, You’d have thought her a statue of fear and despair. In agony close to her bosom she press’d The life of her heart, the child of her breast:— Oh! love from its tenderness gathering might, Had strengthen’d her soul for the dangers of flight. But she’s free!—yes, free from the land where the slave From the hand of oppression must rest in the grave; Where bondage and torture, where scourges and chains Have plac’d on our banner indelible stains. The bloodhounds have miss’d the scent of her way; The hunter is rifled and foil’d of his prey; Fierce jargon and cursing, with clanking of chains, Make sounds of strange discord on Liberty’s plains. With the rapture of love and fullness of bliss, She plac’d on his brow a mother’s fond kiss:— Oh! poverty, danger and death she can brave, For the child of her love is no longer a slave!    
   Very soon the Yankee teachers      Came down and set up school;   But, oh! how the Rebs did hate it,—      It was agin’ their rule.   Our masters always tried to hide      Book learning from our eyes;   Knowledge did’nt agree with slavery—      ’Twould make us all too wise.   But some of us would try to steal      A little from the book.   And put the words together,      And learn by hook or crook.   I remember Uncle Caldwell,      Who took pot liquor fat   And greased the pages of his book,      And hid it in his hat.   And had his master ever seen      The leaves upon his head,   He’d have thought them greasy papers,      But nothing to be read.   And there was Mr. Turner’s Ben,      Who heard the children spell,   And picked the words right up by heart,      And learned to read ’em well.   Well, the Northern folks kept sending      The Yankee teachers down;   And they stood right up and helped us,      Though Rebs did sneer and frown.   And I longed to read my Bible,      For precious words it said;   But when I begun to learn it,      Folks just shook their heads,   And said there is no use trying,      Oh! Chloe, you’re too late;   But as I was rising sixty,      I had no time to wait.   So I got a pair of glasses,      And straight to work I went,   And never stopped till I could read      The hymns and Testament.   Then I got a little cabin      A place to call my own—   And I felt independent      As the queen upon her throne.       
   Do you blame me that I loved him?    If when standing all alone I cried for bread a careless world    Pressed to my lips a stone. Do you blame me that I loved him,    That my heart beat glad and free, When he told me in the sweetest tones    He loved but only me? Can you blame me that I did not see    Beneath his burning kiss The serpent’s wiles, nor even hear    The deadly adder hiss? Can you blame me that my heart grew cold    That the tempted, tempter turned; When he was feted and caressed    And I was coldly spurned? Would you blame him, when you draw from me    Your dainty robes aside, If he with gilded baits should claim    Your fairest as his bride? Would you blame the world if it should press    On him a civic crown; And see me struggling in the depth    Then harshly press me down? Crime has no sex and yet to-day    I wear the brand of shame; Whilst he amid the gay and proud    Still bears an honored name. Can you blame me if I’ve learned to think    Your hate of vice a sham, When you so coldly crushed me down    And then excused the man? Would you blame me if to-morrow    The coroner should say, A wretched girl, outcast, forlorn,    Has thrown her life away? Yes, blame me for my downward course,    But oh! remember well, Within your homes you press the hand    That led me down to hell. I’m glad God’s ways are not our ways,    He does not see as man, Within His love I know there’s room    For those whom others ban. I think before His great white throne,    His throne of spotless light, That whited sepulchres shall wear    The hue of endless night. That I who fell, and he who sinned,    Shall reap as we have sown; That each the burden of his loss    Must bear and bear alone. No golden weights can turn the scale    Of justice in His sight; And what is wrong in woman’s life    In man’s cannot be right.    
   My Life had stood - a Loaded Gun -   In Corners - till a Day   The Owner passed - identified -   And carried Me away -   And now We roam in Sovreign Woods -   And now We hunt the Doe -   And every time I speak for Him   The Mountains straight reply -   And do I smile, such cordial light   Opon the Valley glow -   It is as a Vesuvian face   Had let it’s pleasure through -   And when at Night - Our good Day done -   I guard My Master’s Head -   ’Tis better than the Eider Duck’s   Deep Pillow - to have shared -   To foe of His - I’m deadly foe -   None stir the second time -   On whom I lay a Yellow Eye -   Or an emphatic Thumb -   Though I than He - may longer live   He longer must - than I -   For I have but the power to kill,   Without - the power to die -   
                The Dying Words of Goethe            “Light! more light! the shadows deepen,         And my life is ebbing low, Throw the windows widely open:         Light! more light! before I go.   “Softly let the balmy sunshine         Play around my dying bed, E’er the dimly lighted valley         I with lonely feet must tread.   “Light! more light! for Death is weaving         Shadows ‘round my waning sight, And I fain would gaze upon him         Through a stream of earthly light.”   Not for greater gifts of genius;         Not for thoughts more grandly bright, All the dying poet whispers         Is a prayer for light, more light.   Heeds he not the gathered laurels,         Fading slowly from his sight; All the poet’s aspirations         Centre in that prayer for light.   Gracious Saviour, when life’s day-dreams         Melt and vanish from the sight, May our dim and longing vision         Then be blessed with light, more light.   
            Highlight Actions   Enable or disable annotations               It was not Death, for I stood up,   And all the Dead, lie down -   It was not Night, for all the Bells   Put out their TonguesTongues The clappers inside of the bells, for Noon.   It was not Frost, for on my Flesh   I felt SiroccosSiroccos Hot winds. The Emily Dickinson Lexicon includes definitions from the American Dictionary of the English Language (1844): “A pernicious wind that blows from the south-east in Italy, called the Syrian wind. It is said to resemble the steam from the mouth of an oven.” - crawl -   Nor Fire - for just my marble feet   Could keep a Chancel,Chancel The section near the altar of a church cool -   And yet, it tasted, like them all,   The Figures I have seen   Set orderly, for Burial   Reminded me, of mine -   As if my life were shaven,   And fitted to a frame,   And could not breathe without a key,   And ’twas like Midnight, some -   When everything that ticked - has stopped -   And space stares - all around -   Or Grisly frosts - first Autumn morns,   Repeal the Beating Ground -   But most, like Chaos - Stopless - cool -   Without a Chance, or sparspar The top mast of a ship  -   Or even a Report of Land -   To justify - Despair.   
   Safe in their Alabaster Chambers -   Untouched by Morning -    and untouched by noon -   Sleep the meek members of the Resurrection,    Rafter of Satin and Roof of Stone -    Grand go the Years,    In the Crescent above them -   Worlds scoop their Arcs -    and Firmaments - row -   Diadems - drop -   And Doges surrender -   Soundless as Dots,    On a Disk of Snow.   
   Surgeons must be very careful   When they take the knife!   Underneath their fine incisions   Stirs the Culprit - Life!   
